Convoltional Neural Network:
    CNN is a neural network that uses convolution operations to automatically extract spatial 
    features from data, especially images, and then uses those features for tasks such as 
    classification or detection.

Basic CNN flow:
Image → Convolution → Activation (ReLU) → Pooling → Fully Connected Layer → Output

It uses convolutional layers , which apply learnable filters to detect important features
like edges , textures, shapes and objects, making it highly effective for visula and pattern
recognition tasks.

There are three layers in CNN:
    1) Convolutional layer(extracts the important features)
    2) Pooling layer
    3) Fully connected layer(ANN)

There are several different architectures in CNN like VGG16

why CNN's are introduced while ANN can also capable of doing these tasks...?
problems with ANN:
    1) High computational cost
    2) Overfitting
    3) Loss of spacial features

for example , if there is 50 x 50 pixel image mean 50 x 50 matrix
and if we want to train this image to model , each row has 50 values 
so for each each row 50 , and all rows 50 , then there are 50 x 50 = 2,500 values
and we are assuming there are 100 hidden units , and each connection has a corresponding weights

so there are 2,500 x 100 = 2,50,000 weights 
and if there is another 50 hidden layer unit then 2,50,000 + 50 hidden unit weights

then the computation becomes heavy(high amount of memory and gpu is needed)

we are concentrating on each and every pixel of the data including noise which 
    results in overfitting.

a pixel has a neighboring relationship with another pixel. and arrangement of 
these pixels makes the shape

but in ANN , we flatten these values into 1D shape, so the spatial features and 
relations between pixels is not explicitly preserved.

in convolutional layer we extract the primitive features like tiny edges, shapes
for example in image 6 -> `, ', .... like shapes

and in next convulation layer we merge the primitive features like ` + ' 

and in next convolutional layer , again merges and converts into some bigger features
    know as complex features.

during testing testing , in same why features are extracted and predicts the 
    corresponding matching value.

Applications:
 1) Image classification
 2) Object detection(Identifying what and where objects are in image):
            self driving cars, CCTV survilliance, Industrial automation
 3) Image segmentation(dividing image into meaningfull regions)
 4) Medical image analysis
 5) Self driving cars
 6) Facial recognition
 7) Emotion & expression recognition
 8) Optical character recognition(OCR)

there are two types of images :
    1) grey scale
    2) RGB

Grey scale has intensity range from 0 to 255 where o is pure black and 255 is white
and between values are dark grey and light grey based on intensity direction.

in RGB -> Red {255, 0 , 0} Green{0, 255, 0} Blue{0, 0 , 255}

working of convolutional layer:
    image -> kernel -> pooling -> fully connected layer

    image pixels are represented in matrix and uses kernel or filter to detect features
    by doing dot product and then applies activation functions.
    and then we apply pooling techniques like max pool or avg pool to detect important features
    and passed to fully connected layers to learn and update values

    edges in images : change in intensity values
    example : seperates the color intensity in images 

there are several types of filter , some of they are:
    1) edge filter -> Sobel vertical, sobel horizontal
    2) blur filters -> smooth and remove noise (avg blur, guassion blur)
    3) sharpen filters
    4) High pass filter (stops low intensity details, and pass high intensity) 
    5) Low pass filter 

why paddig is required?
    there may be feature map size can be reduced compared to input size and then 
    in futher processes, feature map will be more reduced result in loss of information

    for example -> 4 x 4 image -> 3 x 3 filter -> 2x2 feature map
    n - m + 1 = 4 - 3 + 1 = 2

    to avoid this we add padding and another reason is when we do dot product 
    middle information is more involved compared to border information.

    to solve these problems , we use padding

*** padding adds zero values as extra layer to images 
    after applying padding image size = feature map size.

    p = m - 1/2 here m is size of the filter
    
*** stride :
    Stride is the number of pixels by which the kernel moves across the image 
    at each step during convolution.

increasing stride value always decreases the feature map size

*** why pooling and what is pooling?
Pooling solves memory issue
    adding several filters results in increasing number of layers or depth in
    output layer

    for example , 32 x 32 x 3 -> 16 filter -> then it has -> 32 x 32 x 16
    each filter has 32 x 32 pixel values

    its heavy to store feature maps

    to prevent this, pooling is introduced?

pooling solves translation variance..
    if we train a CNN model with image of cat positioned left side on image
    and another image with same cat positioned right side of the image

    then model have different feature maps for same images...

    then the model is location dependent instead of feature dependent

how pooling solves these two issues..?
    Pooling is a downsampling operation in CNNs that reduces the spatial size (height and width) 
    of feature maps while keeping the important features.

in pooling , we have to define the windows size
                                    stride
                                    type of pooling(min, max, avg, stochastic)
    
so by doing pooling , we downsample the 4x4 feature map -> 2x2 mean we pack the important
    features close together result in feature dependent instead of location dependent
    simple by pooling we are making translation invariance instead of translation variance.

Global max pooling : use in final layers. instead of using filter , it reduces the entire 
map into single value , same for global max, min or avg pooling

Stochastic pooling : without any criteria , it selects random value

L2 pooling : known as RMS pooling, it offers a balance between max and average pooling
            calcuates square root of sum of squares of the values

after pooling , flatten the input into 1D and given to fully connected layer.

Advantages of pooling :
    Translation invaraince
    reduced size
    Enhanced features
    No trainable parameters , means faster

Disadvantages:
    Self driving cars(multiple cars are considered as same car , pooling doesnt works here)
    Image segmentation(where location matters, we avoid pooling)
    Loss of information(reduced and important features only)


 






